<p>
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) have occurred in many of the large water storage
reservoirs in the Willamette River Basin, resulting in health advisories for
water contact recreation, and in 2018 for the first time in Oregon, a drinking
water advisory due to cyanotoxins. A HAB in Detroit Lake during spring
produced cyanotoxins that were transported downstream in the North Santiam
River, affecting the State capital of Salem's drinking water for about a month.
Similar types of cyanobacterial blooms occur in Blue River
Lake, in the McKenzie River Basin, with similar threats to drinking
water for the City of Eugene.
</p>
<p>
To address this issue, and to complement
on-going limnological surveys, the USGS partnered with the City of Salem,
the Eugene Water and Electric Board, and the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers to
monitor algal blooms in Detroit Lake and nearby Blue River Lake - and the
downstream rivers - using continuous water-quality monitors that transmit
data to water treatment plant operators, dam operations, researchers and the
public in near real-time. Basic parameters, including water temperature,
conductance, and turbidity, are collected vertically in the reservoirs
approximately every meter for the top 10 meters, then every 5 meters down
into the hypolimnion (bottom waters) to a maximum of 75-90 meters
(230-295 feet) deep. HAB parameters include surrogates for algal biomass
(total chlorophyll [fCHL] and blue-green pigment phycocyanin [PC]),
indicators of photosynthetic activity (dissolved oxygen and pH) and
fluorescing dissolved organic matter [fDOM] that is often a reliable
surrogate for dissolved organic carbon. Each of these parameters is
monitored hourly at the surface (~1-meter depth) and through the water
column multiple times per day from locations near dam (at the log booms).
Data are available (per parameter) as:  Profiles with a slider scale to
portray conditions with depth over time; Time-series plots, based on the
hourly data collected at 1-meter depth; and in Contours, color plots of
parameter values by depth over time. When taken together with the downstream
continuous water-quality monitors these data provide an early-warning
indicator of an algal bloom in the reservoir, or the possible release and
transport of algae downstream to drinking-water intakes. These data also
provide insights into the evolution, behavior, and decay of the seasonal
blooms which can inform management strategies, modeling, and perhaps
prediction of blooms in the future.
</p>
